Recent advances in phenotypic and statistical techniques have enabled exploration of a large number of trait in a greater depth. Current study undertaken in Agriculture and Forestry University, Rampur, Chitwan highlights an experimental-design technique and a mixed modeling approach to uncovering association of wheat crops’ yield with the traits characterizing its leaf health (resistance to foliar disease, flag leaf greenness, leaf area under greenness (LAUG) and flag leaf relative chlorophyll content (SPAD)).

Randomization based experiment design constrained for replicated checks balanced within blocks was generated and employed for estimation of augmented treatment genotypes’ effects – also known as augmented row-column design for a small number of checks. The design allows for the recovery of intra-block information to adjust for environmental effects, which was used for studying plant traits that have potential yield determining effect. Observations on crop specific responses were made through metric devices such as ruler, digital scale whereas those traits that could not be physically assessed, such as leaf chlorophyll content (SPAD), and canopy temperature depression (CTD), were measured with equipment as SPAD meter and infrared thermometer. 

Even though a significant proportion of variation was heritable (Both entry and check genotypes’ effects were significant), substantial variation in a yield component and several crop architecture traits (thousand kernel weight, plant height, flag leaf area, canopy temperature depression, days to heading and days to anthesis) was due to spatial components. Major leaf health traits that influenced yield were the leaf greenness and relative chlorophyll content traits. BLUP estimation and adjustment for fixed effects dictate that 68.9% of the genotypic variation of entry genotypes in yield was explained by the full model, that having both spatial and leaf health components. This has revealed that augmenting leaf health traits with structured blocking factors leads to enhanced yield estimation. Field associated traits like weed associated crop damage and lodging loss occurring late in the season, on the other hand, did not have significant impacts in the yield determination.

Apart from the check variety Aditya, which gave the lowest yield (3.02 +/- 0.61 tons ha-1), all other check varieties were similar (3.54 ha-1, 3.33 ha-1, 3.42 ha-1). However, they had more contrasting differences in the yield component trait Number of tillers msq. Recommendation for inclusion of some of the entry genotypes in breeding programs are made based their random effects adjusted estimates. TRCH/SRTU//KACHU/3/KINGBIRD #1, WHEAR/SOKOLL/4/PASTOR//MILAN/KAUZ/3/B... and MUNAL #1*2/4/HUW234+LR34/PRINIA//PBW3... are amongst the top three high yielding entry genotypes. Findings suggest for inclusion of these genotypes, having leaf traits characterizing good health and with high yielding characters, in advanced evaluation trials.